# DTN recap

## History

Over the last 10 years I've been a part of various meet-ups, IRC channels and p2p
networks that are interested in building distributed systems. In [2015][0]
I pulled together a lot of the leaders and contributors from the projects that I
found interesting for an event we called DTN, aka *Data Terra Nemo*,
*Decentralize The Network*, *Don't Think Normal*. It went well!

## 2019

About 6 months ago [Feross][p0], [Mikeal][p1] and [Juan][p2] convinced me I
should do another one and it made sense! After all, many of the projects we
discussed in 2015 were just ideas ([libp2p][libp2p]), still in the prototyping
phase ([dat][dat]) or didn't exist at all ([filecoin][filecoin],
[patchwork][patchwork]). It happened!

<img src="/images/dtn.png" alt="dtn-logo-variant" class="dtn-logo">

This event works for a few reasons.

  1. Zero profit. 100% of what we earn gets spent on the conference &mdash;
  no exceptions. All funds go towards flights, hotels, food, A/V, etc.

  2. We curate speakers who are hard working, highly motivated, implementers but
  also kind, empathetic people. _Software is nothing without the people who work
  together to make it_.

  3. One of the most important reasons this works is that it's _collaborative and
  not competitive_. We're sharing fundamental ideas. And while we're taking
  different approaches to solving some of the same problems, we're all
  interested in the best outcome. Things like programming languages are trivial
  details.

<br/>

## What happened?

Over 2 days about 150 people attended. We recorded about 12 hours of video from
12 speakers. We had 12 formal talks and several impromptu lightning talks. I'll
be posting the videos online once they are processed.

We discussed the technical (and some social) challenges in coding
fundamental primitives that help people build a more distributed and
decentralized internet. We shared language agnostic patterns for building
solutions but also many concrete solutions &mdash; actual code that illustrates
what problems we're solving today.

## How did you do it?

I have no idea. It wasn't easy. Unexpected things happened. People are hard to
organize. I'm not an event organizer. I have no idea what I'm doing. I almost
broke-even though. Ultimately it was a lot of fun. And the lesson here is that
anyone can do this. If you want help putting on your own event, I'm happy to
discuss what I know! My handle is *heapwolf* most places on the internet. If
you're not on any decentralized networks yet, you can even reach me on
[twitter][twitter].

## What's next?

Let's do it again! Many of the projects we met to discuss are moving faster,
more people are involved, so let's not make it a 4 year gap this time. Should we
do the same dates? Different Location? Let's talk.

## Thank you!

If you bought a ticket, you were a sponsor! So I want to thank all the sponsors,
especially those who bought high value tickets. You are helping to build a
better internet for everyone.

<div class="logos">
  <a href="https://www.passportcapital.com/" class="logo">
    <img src="https://dtn.is/images/passport-capital.svg" alt="passport-logo" class="sponsor pc">
  </a>
  <a href="https://protocol.ai/" class="logo">
    <img src="https://dtn.is/images/protocol-labs.png" alt="pl-logo" class="sponsor pl">
  </a>
  <a href="https://wireline.io/" class="logo">
    <img src="https://dtn.is/images/wireline.svg" alt="wireline-logo" class="sponsor wireline">
  </a>
</div>

[0]:https://dtn.is/2015.html

[p0]:https://github.com/feross
[p1]:https://github.com/mikeal
[p2]:https://github.com/jbenet

[twitter]:https://twitter.com/heapwolf

[libp2p]:https://github.com/libp2p/js-libp2p/commit/e770ce782278d5be139201560bb101682458ed06
[dat]:https://github.com/datproject/dat/tree/8c9f80841e717ba30bd02953ba5d425ddabd24dd
[patchwork]:https://github.com/ssbc/patchwork/tree/572440feaf959755763efb726087066a6f5b29db
[filecoin]:https://filecoin.io/

[t0]:https://twitter.com/feross/status/918217393784197121?s=21
