# Hello, world

Hi my name is Paolo! I used to work at MIT. Before that I worked at some
banks. Now I'm co-founder and CTO at [Nodejitsu][0].


I decided to start blogging. As an exercise, I also decided to write 
the software that would run the blog using [Node.js][2] and [Markdown][3]. 
As an introductory post, I'd like to explain how it works.

Before I get started I'd like to mention, there are a lot of great options 
for blogging. I'm just doing this for [fun][4], and its a good vehicle for 
sharing some thoughts on Node.js. If you are new to node this will be cool,
if your not, skip this post.

First of all, [download][5] Node.js. Then you'll want to download the 
[code][6] for this blog from github. Node.js is simple. Really simple. There
are more interesting reasons to use Node.js, but the fact that it is simple 
is one of the most compelling. Node is run from the command line, so to use it
open your terminal. 


## Let's write a small node program.
Create a folder on your desktop and put a text file in it called `simple.js`. 
In this text file add `console.log('hello, world');`. On the command line,
[navigate][7] to this folder and type `node simple.js`. The program will 
output the following text `hello, world`.

So as you can see, a node program is just a text file with Javascript in it.
Node gives you Javascript, but also allows you to interface with other parts of 
your system such as a disk or network, etc. Obviously, when a program gets more 
complex and a file gets bigger, you'll need to break it apart into smaller more 
manageable parts. In the Node.js world, they call these `modules`. Modules can 
be code that you write or they can be code that someone else has written. This 
blog uses some modules that have been written by other people.


## Working with modules
The code we want to run is in `server/index.js`. Let's start with the first 9 
lines of code. This is how we get modules into our program. When you get a 
module, you use the require function to specify what module you want. Some of 
these modules are [a part of node][8], and some of them are written by other 
people. When they are written by other people, they are called packages.

```javascript
var http = require('http');
var url = require('url');
var fs = require('fs');
var path = require('path');

var marked = require('marked');
var hljs = require('highlight.js');
var mime = require('mime');
```

If you run `node server/index.js`, you will notice that Node complains and 
that there is some missing software. 

```bash
module.js:340
    throw err;
          ^
Error: Cannot find module 'marked'
    at Function.Module._resolveFilename (module.js:338:15)
    at Function.Module._load (module.js:280:25)
    at Module.require (module.js:362:17)
    at require (module.js:378:17)
    at Object.<anonymous> (/Users/paolo/workroot/git/hij1nx/blog/server/index.js:7:14)
    at Module._compile (module.js:449:26)
    at Object.Module._extensions..js (module.js:467:10)
    at Module.load (module.js:356:32)
    at Function.Module._load (module.js:312:12)
    at Module.runMain (module.js:492:10)
```

In the code, we require `marked`, `highlight.js` and `mime`, but they are not 
modules that ship with node. So we need to somehow get these. Fortunately, node 
ships with a program called [npm][9] (Node Package Manager). npm is run from 
the command line and can help us install modules.

There is a file in the root of this project called `packge.json`. It is a [JSON][10] 
file that contains information about the program and what modules it needs. 

```json
{
	"name": "blog",
	"description": "a minimalist blog",
	"version": "0.0.1",
	"dependencies": {
		"marked": "*",
		"mime": "*",
		"highlight.js": "*"
	}
}
```

When a program *needs* other modules to run, they are called `dependencies`. 
To install the dependencies, type `npm install` within the directory where 
you downloaded the code. npm will look at the `package.json` file and attempt 
to download the dependencies for this project, then download them so you can 
run the program. npm is [great][11].

After we require some modules we start doing some things.


## Working with file paths
After we require some modules. Let's say that we want to read a file from 
the disk. Parsing and normalizing strings and ensuring that the path divider 
is in the correct place (and is appropriate for your operating system) can 
be very tedious. Node's `path` module helps deal with this.

```javascript
var indexpath = path.join(__dirname, '..', 'public', 'index.html');
```

You'll notice `__dirname` is being joined in the path, this is a [global][12]
variable that represents the name of the directory that the currently 
executing script resides in. After joining the path it looks like
`/Users/paolo/workroot/git/hij1nx/blog/public/index.html` on my machine.


## Building the content
Let's read a file from the disk. Its the main html file for the blog. It 
contains most of the layout.

```javascript
var index = fs.readFileSync(indexpath, 'utf8');
```

The [part][13] responsible for reading the file is `fs.readFileSync(path)`.
This synchronously reads a file from the disk. It's ok to read the file 
synchronously in this case, because its relatively small and we only do it 
only once. `utf8` tells Node what type of data we're dealing with. We then 
store the value in a local variable named `index`.

After that we set up two arrays, one to build the content and a table of 
contents. We will eventually merge this into the data that is in the `index`
variable.

```javascript
var content = [], toc = [];
```

Now we're going to store our blog's content in markdown format. But we're
not going to present markdown to our readers obviously. So we need a good 
way to parse it and turn it into html. Nodejitsu's [Christopher Jeffrey][14]
has written a comprehensive and feature complete module for parsing 
markdown. Here we set some options on it. 

We pass the marked module an option responsible for highlighting code. If 
you look at the `data` folder in this project, you will find markdown files 
that contain triple back ticks enclosing code snippets. After the first set
of backticks, you will see the language specified.

```javascript
marked.setOptions({
  gfm: true,
  pedantic: false,
  sanitize: true,
  highlight: function(code, lang) {
		return hljs.highlight(lang, code).value;
  }
});
```

The next thing we need to do is get all the markdown files. It seemed 
sensible to store the files named with the date and time. Naming the file
with the title of the blog can get really ugly and naming them numerically
doesn't provide me enough context.

Using `fs.readdirSync(path)` we can get an array of everything that is
in a directory. We'll also want to parse the names of the files into
Javascript dates, so lets remove the file extension for now.

```javascript
var datapath = path.join(__dirname, '..', 'data');
var filenames = fs.readdirSync(datapath);

for (var i = 0, l = filenames.length; i<l; i++) {
  filenames[i] = path.basename(filenames[i], '.md');
}
```

Most blogs will present the most recent article first, so we can use the
filename to sort the array of file names.

```javascript
filenames
	.sort(function (date1, date2) {

		//
	  // This is a comparison function that will result in 
	  // dates being sorted in descending order.
	  //
	  var date1 = new Date(Date.parse(date1));
	  var date2 = new Date(Date.parse(date2));

	  if (date1 > date2) return -1;
	  if (date1 < date2) return 1;
	  return 0;
	})
```

We iterate over the array of file names and read the file from disk.
After getting each file we can run the markdown renderer on it. Also,
since the filename is the data, why not save it off to a local variable
and use it. 

I think an `h1` tag is a good way to identify articles. So we convert
each `h1` into a link. This allows deep linking back to the article from
the url. Might as well build a table of contents at the same time!

```javascript
	.forEach(function (name) {

	  //
	  // get each markdown file and convert it into html.
	  //

	  // the file name should be a parsable date.
	  var date = name;

	  //
	  // add the file extension back since we now want to
	  // read it from the disk.
	  //
	  name = path.join(__dirname, '..', 'data', name + '.md');
	  var data = fs.readFileSync(name, 'utf8');

	  //
	  // change the headers to links to provide deep linking.
	  //
	  var markup = marked(data).replace(/<h1>(.*?)<\/h1>/, function(a, h1) {
	  	
			// turn the title into something that we can use as a link.
	  	var id = h1.replace(/ /g, '-');
	  	
	  	// add a link to the article to the table of contents.
	  	toc.push('<a href="#' + id + '">' + h1 + 
	  	'</a> <span class="date">' + date + '</span>');

	  	// return the new version of the header.
	  	return '<a id="' + id + '"><h1><a href="#' + id + '">' + h1 + '</a></h1>';
	  });

	  content.push(markup);
	});
```

Now that we've built the content, we can merge the content into
a larger document. We do that by simply looking for a unique token
in the `index` variable's data.

```javascript
index = index.replace('<!-- toc -->', toc.join('<br/>'));
index = index.replace('<!-- content -->', content.join('<br/><hr><br/>'));
```

## Serving the content
Next we're going to set up a server. Before we do this, it helps to 
understand how simple an http server is. Run this with node and then to to
`http://127.0.0.1:8000` in your browser. Yes, it's that simple.

```javascript
var http = require('http');
http.createServer(function (req, res) {

  res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/plain'});
  res.end('Hello World\n');
}).listen(8000, '127.0.0.1');
```

Ok, now let's go back to looking at the code from our program. We set up our
http server and when a connection is made, we get a request (`req`) and a 
response (`res`) object. We check the url of the request to find out if it's
a request for the index file, if it is, we can just serve it and be done.

```javascript
http.createServer(function (req, res) {

	//
	// a request without any specific files
	//
  if (req.url === '/' || req.url === '/index.html') {
    res.statusCode = 200;
    res.writeHeader('Content-Type', 'test/html');
    res.end(index);
    return;
  }
```

Remember that once we serve this file, the browser is going to be asking us
for all kinds of stuff, style sheets, images, javascript, etc. We need to
accommodate those requests. First we parse the url and ensure we only serve
a file from the `public` folder of our application. It would be a huge 
liability to allow people to request any file from our file system.

```javascript
  //
  // figure out what's in the request.
  //
  var rawurl = url.parse(req.url);
  var pathname = decodeURI(rawurl.pathname);
  var base = path.join(__dirname, '..', 'public');
  var filepath = path.normalize(path.join(base, pathname));
```


Next, we are telling the browser what kind of file we are serving it. By
passing a file extension to the `mime` module, it will tell us the appropriate
[mime][16] type. If we can't find a mime type, abort the request.

```javascript
  //
  // set the appropriate mime type if possible.
  //
  var mimetype = mime.lookup(path.extname(filepath).split(".")[1]);
  
  if (!mimetype) {
    return;
  }

  res.writeHeader('Content-Type', mimetype);
```

Next we should check to see if the file actually exists. In order to do this,
we use the `fs.stat(path, callback)` [method][17]. If there is a problem, the
`err` object will not be null. It is a typical pattern in Node for an
asynchronous operation to have the error as the first argument.

We don't want to serve directories. So if it's not a directory we should serve 
it. We can serve it by piping the file directly to the response object. Ok,
that might sound a little hand wavy. Let's conclude by having the server listen
on port 80. But Let's talk about the hand wavy part after looking at this code.

```javascript
  //
  // find out if the file is there and if it is serve it...
  //
  fs.stat(filepath, function (err, stat) {
    
    if (err && err.code === 'ENOENT') {
        res.statusCode = 404;
        res.end('not found');
    }
    else {
      if (!stat.isDirectory()) {
        res.statusCode = 200;
        fs.createReadStream(filepath).pipe(res);
      }
    }
  });

}).listen(80);
```


## Streaming Abstractions for fun and performance
Ok, what does it mean to `pipe a file to a response object`. To understand 
this, we first need to understand what [streams][18] are. You can think of
a stream just like the stream of water that comes out of the tap in your 
kitchen sink. Let's continue this analogy.

If you stand with your mouth under the tap, no one else can drink from it
until you are done. A `streaming abstraction` is like pouring cups of water 
and then handing them out. Once you're done you can come back for more and 
everyone gets a chance to drink.

Many [IO][19] operations in Node have streaming abstractions. The main reason 
for this is that we don't know how big data is going to be. Data might even be 
continuous and if it is, we don't want to put everything or everyone on hold 
while we deliver it. 

One of Node's goals is to handle network concurrency well. Streaming 
abstractions and features such as the [Event Loop][20] help facilitate this. 
For more about this, you might want to read Node's [technical overview][21].

## Conclusion
This was a fun article to write and code! I hope it helped you to understand 
something about Node. If you like it, please star the [project][22] on github.
If you find any issues with it, open an issue or send a pull request!


[0]:http://nodejitsu.com
[1]:http://thenodefirm.com
[2]:http://nodejs.org
[3]:http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/
[4]:https://twitter.com/izs/status/187639633641865216
[5]:http://nodejs.org/download/
[6]:http://github.com/hij1nx/blog
[7]:http://doors.stanford.edu/~sr/computing/basic-unix.html
[8]:http://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/
[9]:http://npmjs.org
[10]:http://json.org
[11]:http://blog.izs.me/post/1675072029/10-cool-things-you-probably-didnt-realize-npm-could-do
[12]:http://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/globals.html
[13]:http://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fs_fs_readfilesync_filename_encoding
[14]:https://github.com/chjj
[15]:https://github.com/chjj/marked
[16]:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mimetype
[17]:http://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fs_fs_stat_path_callback
[18]:http://maxogden.com/node-streams
[19]:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Input/output
[20]:https://github.com/joyent/libuv
[21]:http://nodejs.org/about/
[22]:https://github.com/hij1nx/blog
